The progressive historical role of capitalism may be summedup in two brief propositions: increase in the productive forces ofsocial labour, and the socialisation of that labour. But both thesefacts manifest themselves in extremely diverse processes in differentbranches of the national economy. 
 
Perhaps the profoundest cause of disagreement with theNarodniks is the difference in our fundamental views on social andeconomic processes. When studying the latter, the Narodnik usuallydraws conclusions that point to some moral; he does not regard thediverse groups of persons taking part in production as creators ofvarious forms of life; he does not set out to present the sum-total ofsocial and economic relationships as the result of the mutual relationsbetween these groups, which have different interests and differenthistorical roles. ... 
 
If the writer of these lines has succeeded in providing somematerial for clarifying these problems, he may regard his labours asnot having been fruitless.
 
In the history of modern socialism this is a phenomenon,that the strife of the various trends within the socialist movement hasfrom national become international.
 
If democracy, in essence, means the abolition of classdomination, then why should not a socialist minister charm the wholebourgeois world by orations on class collaboration?
 
Those who are really convinced that they have made progressin science would not demand freedom for the new views to continue sideby side with the old, but the substitution of the new views for the old.
 
We are marching in a compact group along a precipitous anddifficult path, firmly holding each other by the hand. We aresurrounded on all sides by enemies, and we have to advance almostconstantly under their fire. We have combined, by a freely adopteddecision, for the purpose of fighting the enemy, and not of retreatinginto the neighbouring marsh, the inhabitants of which, from the veryoutset, have reproached us with having separated ourselves into anexclusive group and with having chosen the path of struggle instead ofthe path of conciliation. And now some among us begin to cry out: Letus go into the marsh! And when we begin to shame them, they retort:What backward people you are! Are you not ashamed to deny us theliberty to invite you to take a better road! Oh, yes, gentlemen! Youare free not only to invite us, but to go yourselves wherever you will,even into the marsh. In fact, we think that the marsh is your properplace, and we are prepared to render you every assistance to get there.Only let go of our hands, don’t clutch at us anddon’t besmirch the grand word freedom, for we too are“free” to go where we please, free to fight notonly against the marsh, but also against those who are turning towardsthe marsh! 
 
In a country ruled by an autocracy, with a completelyenslaved press, in a period of desperate political reaction in whicheven the tiniest outgrowth of political discontent and protest ispersecuted, the theory of revolutionary Marxism suddenly forced its wayinto the censored literature before the governmentrealised what had happened and the unwieldy army of censors andgendarmes discovered the new enemy and flung itself upon him. 
 
This fear of criticism displayed by the advocates of freedomof criticism cannot be attributed solely to craftiness. No, themajority of the Economists look with sincere resentment upon alltheoretical controversies, factional disagreements, broad politicalquestions, plans for organising revolutionaries, etc.
 
History has now confronted us with an immediate task whichis the most revolutionary of all the immediate tasks confronting theproletariat of any country. The fulfilment of this task, thedestruction of the most powerful bulwark, not only of European, but (itmay now be said) of Asiatic reaction, would make the Russianproletariat the vanguard of the international revolutionaryproletariat. And we have the right to count upon acquiring thishonourable title, already earned by our predecessors, therevolutionaries of the seventies, if we succeed in inspiring ourmovement, which is a thousand times broader and deeper, with the samedevoted determination and vigour.
 
 Since there can be no talk of an independent ideologyformulated by the working masses themselves in the process of theirmovement, the only choice is – either bourgeois or socialistideology. There is no middle course (for mankind has not created a“third” ideology).(This does not mean, of course, that the workers have no part increating such an ideology. They take part, however, not as workers, butas socialist theoreticians, as Proudhons and Weitlings, to the extentthat they are able to acquire the knowledge of their age and developthat knowledge.)
 
To belittle the socialist ideology in any way, toturn aside from it in the slightest degree means tostrengthen bourgeois ideology. There is much talk of spontaneity. Butthe spontaneous development of the working-classmovement leads to its subordination to bourgeois ideology; for thespontaneous working-class movement is trade-unionism, and tradeunionism means the ideological enslavement of the workers by thebourgeoisie. Hence, our task, the task of Social-Democracy, is tocombat spontaneity, to divert the working-class movement fromthis spontaneous, trade-unionist striving to come under the wing of thebourgeoisie, and to bring it under the wing of revolutionary SocialDemocracy.
 
Revolutionary Social-Democracy has always included thestruggle for reforms as part of its activities. But it utilises“economic” agitation for the purpose of presentingto the government, not only demands for all sorts of measures, but also(and primarily) the demand that it cease to be an autocratic government.
 
A basic condition for the necessary expansion of politicalagitation is the organisation of comprehensive political exposure.
 
It is particularly necessary to arouse in all whoparticipate in practical work, or are preparing to take up that work,discontent with the amateurism prevailing amongus and an unshakable determination to rid ourselves of it.
 
This struggle must be organised, according to “allthe rules of the art”, by people who are professionallyengaged in revolutionary activity. The fact that the masses arespontaneously being drawn into the movement does not make theorganisation of this struggle less necessary. Onthe contrary, it makes it more necessary. 
 
This struggle must be organised, according to “allthe rules of the art”, by people who are professionallyengaged in revolutionary activity. 
 
Attention, must be devoted principally to raisingthe workers to the level of revolutionaries; it is not at all our task todescend to the level of the “workingmasses.”
 
Every question “runs in avicious circle” because political life as a whole is anendless chain consisting of an infinite number of links. The whole artof politics lies in finding and taking as firm a grip as we can of thelink that is least likely to be struck from our hands, the one that ismost important at the given moment, the one that most of all guaranteesits possessor the possession of the whole chain.
 
A newspaper is not only a collective propagandist and acollective agitator, it is also a collective organiser. 
 
If the Congress was a struggle between the Iskra-ist and theanti-Iskra-ist elements, were there no intermediate, unstable elementswho vacillated between the two? Anyone at all familiar with our Partyand with the picture generally presented by congresses of every kindwill be inclined a priori to answer the question in the affirmative.
 
But every little difference may become a big one if it isinsisted on.
 
Are we to build the Party on the basis of that alreadyformed and welded core of Social-Democrats whichbrought about the Party Congress, for instance, and which shouldenlarge and multiply Party organisations of all kinds; or are we tocontent ourselves with the soothing phrase thatall who help are Party members? 
 
In the beginning we had to teach the workers the ABC, bothin the literal and in the figurative senses. Now the standard ofpolitical literacy has risen so gigantically that we can and shouldconcentrate all our efforts on the more direct Social-Democraticobjectives aimed at giving an organised direction to the revolutionarystream.
 
Social-Democracy, however, wants, on the contrary, todevelop the class struggle of the proletariat to the point where thelatter will take the leading part in the popular Russian revolution,i.e., will lead this revolution to a the democratic-dictatorship of theproletariat and the peasantry. 
 
The basic mistake made by those who now criticise WhatIs To Be Done? (1901) is to treat the pamphlet apart fromits connection with the concrete historical situation of a definite,and now long past, period in the development of our Party.
 
That today, when the wave has ebbed, there remain and willremain only real Marxists, does not frighten us but rejoices us. 
 
When the masses are digesting a new and exceptionally richexperience of direct revolutionary struggle, the theoretical strugglefor a revolutionary outlook, i.e., for revolutionary Marxism, becomesthe watchword of the day. 
 
1) Things exist independently of our consciousness,independently of our perceptions, outside of us, for it is beyond doubtthat alizarin existed in coal tar yesterday and it is equally beyonddoubt that yesterday we knew nothing of the existence of this alizarinand received no sensations from it.2) There is definitely no difference in principle between thephenomenon and the thing-in-itself, and there can be no suchdifference. The only difference is between what is known and what isnot yet known. And philosophical inventions of specific boundariesbetween the one and the other, inventions to the effect that thething-in-itself is “beyond” phenomena (Kant), orthat we can and must fence ourselves off by some philosophicalpartition from the problem of a world which in one part or another isstill unknown but which exists outside us (Hume)—all this isthe sheerest nonsense, Schrulle, crotchet,invention.3) In the theory of knowledge, as in every other branch of science, wemust think dialectically, that is, we must not regard our knowledge asready-made and unalterable, but must determine how knowledgeemerges from ignorance, how incomplete, inexactknowledge becomes more complete and more exact.
 
Once we accept the point of view that human knowledgedevelops from ignorance, we shall find millions of examples of it justas simple as the discovery of alizarin in coal tar, millions ofobservations not only in the history of science and technology but inthe everyday life of each and every one of us that illustrate thetransformation of “things-in-themselves” into“things-for-us.” 
 
It goes without saying that in examining the connectionbetween one of the schools of modern physicists and the rebirth ofphilosophical idealism, it is far from being our intention to deal withspecific physical theories. What interests us exclusively is theepistemological conclusions that follow from certain definitepropositions and generally known discoveries. Our object, therefore,will be confined to explaining clearly the essence of the differencebetween these various trends and the relation in which they stand tothe fundamental lines of philosophy.
 
Behind the epistemological scholasticism ofempirio-criticism one must not fail to see the struggle of parties inphilosophy, a struggle which in the last analysis reflects thetendencies and ideology of the antagonistic classes in modern society.
 
The art of any propagandist and agitator consists in hisability to find the best means of influencing any given audience, bypresenting a definite truth, in such a way as to make it mostconvincing, most easy to digest, most graphic, and most stronglyimpressive.
 
All official and liberal science defends wage-slavery,whereas Marxism has declared relentless war on that slavery.
 
The Marxist doctrine is omnipotent because it is true. It iscomprehensive and harmonious, and provides men with an integral worldoutlook irreconcilable with any form of superstition, reaction, ordefence of bourgeois oppression. It is the legitimate successor to thebest that man produced in the nineteenth century, as represented byGerman philosophy, English political economy and French socialism.
 
Where the bourgeois economists saw a relation between things(the exchange of one commodity for another) Marx revealed a relationbetween people. 
 
Capital, created by the labour of the worker, crushes theworker, ruining small proprietors and creating an army of unemployed.
 
By destroying small-scale production, capital leads to anincrease in productivity of labour and to the creation of a monopolyposition for the associations of big capitalists.
 
Capitalism has triumphed all over the world, but thistriumph is only the prelude to the triumph of labour over capital.
 
When feudalism was overthrown and “free”capitalist society appeared in the world, it at once became apparentthat this freedom meant a new system of oppression and exploitation ofthe working people.
 
People always have been the foolish victims of deception andself-deception in politics, and they always will be until they havelearnt to seek out the interests of some class or other behind allmoral, religious, political and social phrases, declarations andpromises.
 
And there is only one way of smashing the resistance ofthose classes, and that is to find, in the very society which surroundsus, the forces which can—and, owing to their social position,must—constitute the power capable of sweeping away the oldand creating the new, and to enlighten and organise those forces forthe struggle.
 
I am in general trying to read Hegel materialistically:Hegel is materialism which has been stood on its head (according toEngels) – that is to say, I cast aside for the most part God,the Absolute, the Pure Idea, etc. 
 
Dialectics is the teaching which showshow Opposites can be and how they happen to be (howthey become) identical,—under whatconditions they are identical, becoming transformed into oneanother,—why the human mind should grasp these opposites notas dead, rigid, but as living, conditional, mobile, becomingtransformed into one another.
 
These parts of the work should be called: “a bestmeans for getting a headache!” 
 
It is impossible completely to understand Marx’s Capital,and especially its first Chapter, without having thoroughly studied andunderstood the whole of Hegel’s Logic.Consequently, half a century later none of the Marxists understoodMarx!! 
 
Dialectics as living, many-sided knowledge (with the numberof sides eternally increasing), with an infinite number of shades ofevery approach and approximation to reality (with a philosophicalsystem growing into a whole out of each shade) 
 
Philosophical idealism is only nonsense from the standpointof crude, simple, metaphysical materialism. From the standpoint ofdialectical materialism, on the other hand, philosophical idealism is aone-sided, exaggerated, development (inflation, distension) of one ofthe features, aspects, facets of knowledge, into an absolute, divorcedfrom matter, from nature, apotheosised.
 
Human knowledge is not (or does not follow) a straight line,but a curve, which endlessly approximates a series of circles, aspiral. Any fragment, segment, section of this curve can be transformed(transformed one-sidedly) into an independent, complete, straight line,which then (if one does not see the wood for the trees) leads into thequagmire, into clerical obscurantism (where it is anchoredby the class interests of the ruling classes).
 
To the socialist it is not the horrors of war that are the hardestto endure ... but the horrors of the treachery shown by the leaders ofpresent day socialism, the horrors of the collapse of the present-dayInternational.
 
War cannot be abolished unless classes are abolished andSocialism is created.
 
We fully regard civil wars, i.e., wars waged by theoppressed class against the oppressing class, slaves againstslave-owners, serfs against land-owners, and wage-workers against thebourgeoisie, as legitimate, progressive and necessary.
 
If tomorrow, Morocco were to declare war on France, India onEngland, Persia or China on Russia, and so forth, those would be“just” “defensive” wars, irrespectiveof who attacked first; and every Socialist would sympathise with thevictory of the oppressed, dependent, unequal states against theoppressing, slave-owning, predatory “great” powers.
 
The working class cannot play its world-revolutionary roleunless it wages a ruthless struggle against this renegacy.spinelessness, subservience to opportunism and unexampled vulgarizationof the theories of Marxism.
 
Convert the imperialist war into civil war.
 
A revolutionary class cannot but wish for the defeat of itsgovernment in a reactionary war.
 
Socialists must explain to the masses that they have noother road of salvation except the revolutionary overthrow of“their” governments, and that advantage must betaken of these governments’ embarrassments in the present warprecisely for this purpose. 
 
Socialists cannot achieve their great aim without fightingagainst all oppression of nations.
 
The Socialists of oppressed nationsmust, in their turn, unfailingly fight for the complete (includingorganisational) unity of the workers of theoppressed and oppressing nationalities.
 
The war of 1914-18 was imperialist (that is, anannexationist, predatory, war of plunder) on the part of both sides; itwas a war for the division of the world, for the partition andrepartition of colonies and spheres of influence of finance capital.
 
We Social-Democrats always stand for democracy, not“in the name of capitalism, ” but in the name ofclearing the path for our movement, which clearingis impossible without the development of capitalism. 
 
Monopolies, oligarchy, the striving for domination and notfor freedom, the exploitation of an increasing number of small or weaknations by a handful of the richest or most powerful nations— all these have given birth to those distinctivecharacteristics of imperialism which compel us to define it asparasitic or decaying capitalism.
 
When nine-tenths of Africa had been seized (by 1900), whenthe whole world had been divided up,there was inevitably ushered in theera of monopoly possession of colonies and, consequently, ofparticularly intense struggle for the division and the redivision ofthe world. 
 
The so-called Great Powers have long been exploiting andenslaving a whole number of small and weak nations. And the imperialistwar is a war for the division and redivision of this kind of booty.
 
It is not done in modern socialist parties to talk or eventhink about the significance of this idea, — the“withering away” of the state.
 
A standing army and police are the chief instruments ofstate power.
 
Our Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks themselvesshare, and instil into the minds of the people, the false notion thatuniversal suffrage “in the present-day state” isreally capable of revealing the will of the majority of the workingpeople and of securing its realization.
 
the working class must break up, smash the“ready-made state machinery,” and not confineitself merely to laying hold of it.
 
Democracy is a form of the state, it represents, on the onehand, the organized, systematic use of force against persons; but, onthe other hand, it signifies the formal recognition of equality ofcitizens, the equal right of all to determine the structure of, and toadminister, the state. 
 
Democracy for an insignificant minority, democracy for therich — that is the democracy of capitalist society.
 
The oppressed are allowed once every few years to decidewhich particular representatives of the oppressing class shallrepresent and repress them in parliament.
 
The dictatorship of the proletariat, i.e., the organizationof the vanguard of the oppressed as the ruling class for the purpose ofsuppressing the oppressors, cannot result merely in an expansion ofdemocracy. Simultaneously with an immense expansion of democracy, whichfor the first time becomes democracy for the poor, democracy for thepeople, and not democracy for the money-bags, the dictatorship of theproletariat imposes a series of restrictions on the freedom of theoppressors, the exploiters, the capitalists. 
 
And so in capitalist society we have a democracy that iscurtailed, wretched, false, a democracy only for the rich, for theminority. The dictatorship of the proletariat, the period of transitionto communism, will for the first time create democracy for the people,for the majority, along with the necessary suppression of theexploiters, of the minority.
 
In our attitude towards the war, which under the newgovernment of Lvov and Co. unquestionably remains on Russia’spart a predatory imperialist war owing to the capitalist nature of thatgovernment, not the slightest concession to “revolutionarydefencism” is permissible.
 
In view of the undoubted honesty of those broad sections ofthe mass believers in revolutionary defencism who accept the war onlyas a necessity, and not as a means of conquest, in view of the factthat they are being deceived by the bourgeoisie, it is necessary withparticular thoroughness, persistence and patience to explain theirerror to them, and to prove that without overthrowing capital itis impossible to end the war by a truly democratic peace.
 
The masses must be made to see that the SovietsofWorkers’ Deputiesare the only possible form of revolutionarygovernment.
 
Abolition of the police, the army and the bureaucracy. Thesalaries of all officials, all of whom are elective and displaceableat any time, not to exceed the average wage of a competent worker.
 
It is not our immediate task to“introduce” socialism, but only to bring socialproduction and the distribution of products at once under the controlof the Soviets of Workers’ Deputies.
 
It is, of course, much easier to shout, abuse, and howl thanto attempt to relate, to explain.
 
A party is the vanguard of a class, and its duty is to leadthe masses and not merely to reflect the average political level of themasses.
 
It is the duty of the revolution to put an end tocompromise, and to put an end to compromise means taking the path ofsocialist revolution.
 
The Russian is a bad worker compared with people in advancedcountries. It could not be otherwise under the tsarist regime and inview of the persistence of the hangover from serfdom. The task that theSoviet government must set the people in all its scope is - learn towork. The Taylor system, the last word of capitalism in this respect,like all capitalist progress, is a combination of the refined brutalityof bourgeois exploitation and a number of the greatest scientificachievements in the field.
 
Human child birth is an act which transforms the woman intoan almost lifeless, bloodstained heap of flesh, tortured, tormented anddriven frantic by pain. 
 
Let the “socialist” snivellers croak,let the bourgeoisie rage and fume, but only people who shut their eyesso as not to see, and stuff their ears so as not to hear, can fail tonotice that all over the world the birth pangs of the old, capitalistsociety, which is pregnant with socialism, have begun. 
 
The passing of state power from one classto another is the first, the principal, the basic sign of a revolution,both in the strictly scientific and in the practical political meaningof that term. To this extent, the bourgeois, or thebourgeois-democratic, revolution in Russia is completed.
 
The Bolshevik slogans and ideas on the wholehave been confirmed by history; but concretely things have worked out differently;they are more original, more peculiar, more variated than anyone couldhave expected.. 
 
“The revolutionary-democratic dictatorship of theproletariat and the peasantry” has already become a realityin the Russian revolution, for this “formula”envisages only a relation of classes, and not a concretepolitical institution implementing this relation. 
 
The crisis in Germany has only begun. It will inevitably endin the transfer of political power to the German proletariat. TheRussian proletariat is following events with the keenest attention andenthusiasm. Now even the blindest workers in the various countries willsee that the Bolsheviks were right in basing their whole tactics on thesupport of the world workers' revolution.
 
In the course of two years Soviet power in one of the mostbackward countries of Europe did more to emancipate women and to maketheir status equal to that of the “strong” sex thanall the advanced, enlightened, “democratic”republics of the world did in the course of 130 years.
 
Down with this contemptible fraud! There cannot be, nor isthere nor will there ever be “equality” between theoppressed and the oppressors, between the exploited and the exploiters.There cannot be, nor is there nor will there ever be real“freedom” as long as there is no freedom for womenfrom the privileges which the law grants to men, as long as there is nofreedom for the workers from the yoke of capital, and no freedom forthe toiling peasants from the yoke of the capitalists, landlords andmerchants.
 
Bourgeois democracy is democracy of pompous phrases, solemnwords, exuberant promises and the high-sounding slogans of freedom andequality. But, in fact, it screens the non-freedom and inferiority ofwomen, the non-freedom and inferiority of the toilers and exploited.
 
Modern monopolist capitalism on a world-wide scale— imperialist wars are absolutely inevitable under suchan economic system, as long as private property inthe means of production exists.
 
We must display determination, endurance, firmness andunanimity. We must stop at nothing. Everybody and everything must beused to save the rule of the workers and peasants, to save communism. 
 
But the dictatorship of the proletariat cannot be exercisedthrough an organisation embracing the whole of that class, because inall capitalist countries (and not only over here, in one of the mostbackward) the proletariat is still so divided, so degraded, and socorrupted in parts (by imperialism in some countries) that anorganisation taking in the whole proletariat cannot directly exerciseproletarian dictatorship. 
 
The Bolsheviks could not have retained power for two and ahalf months, let alone two and a half years, without the most rigorousand truly iron discipline in our Party.
 
How is the discipline of the proletariat’srevolutionary party maintained? How is it tested? How is it reinforced?First, by the class-consciousness of the proletarian vanguard and byits devotion to the revolution, by its tenacity, self-sacrifice andheroism. Second, by its ability to link up, maintain the closestcontact, and—if you wish—merge, in certain measure,with the broadest masses of the working people—primarily withthe proletariat, but also with the non-proletarianmasses of working people. Third, by the correctness of the politicalleadership exercised by this vanguard, by the correctness of itspolitical strategy and tactics, provided the broad masses have seen, fromtheir own experience, that they are correct.
 
Russia achieved Marxism—the only correctrevolutionary theory—through the agonyshe experienced in the course of half a century of unparalleled tormentand sacrifice, of unparalleled revolutionary heroism, incredibleenergy, devoted searching, study, practical trial, disappointment,verification, and comparison with European experience.
 
Thanks to the political emigration caused by tsarism,revolutionary Russia acquired a wealth of international links andexcellent information on the forms and theories of the worldrevolutionary movement, such as no other country possessed.
 
Bolshevism went through fifteen years of practical history(1903-17) unequalled anywhere in the world in its wealth of experience.During those fifteen years, no other country knew anything evenapproximating to that revolutionary experience, that rapid and variedsuccession of different forms of the movement—legal andillegal, peaceful and stormy, underground and open, local circles andmass movements, and parliamentary and terrorist forms.
 
It is at moments of need that one learns who one’sfriends are. Defeated armies learn their lesson.
 
Experience has proved that, on certain very importantquestions of the proletarian revolution, allcountries will inevitably have to do what Russia has done.
 
Without such thorough, circumspect and long preparations[since 1903], we could not have achieved victory in October 1917, orhave consolidated that victory.
 
To reject compromises “on principle,” toreject the permissibility of compromises in general, no matter of whatkind, is childishness. A political leader who desires to be useful tothe revolutionary proletariat must be able to distinguish concretecases of compromises that are inexcusable and are an expression ofopportunism and treachery.
 
In 1912 the agent provocateurMalinovsky got into the Bolshevik Central Committee. He betrayed scoresand scoresof the best and most loyal comrades; he was obliged, with the other, toassist in the education of scores and scores of thousands of newBolsheviks through the medium of the legal press.
 
If you want to help the “masses” and winthe sympathy and support of the “masses,” youshould not fear difficulties, or pinpricks, chicanery, insults andpersecution from the “leaders,” but must absolutelywork wherever the masses are to be found.
 
All efforts and all attention should now be concentrated onthe next step — the search after formsof the transition or the approachto the proletarian revolution.
 
One must not count in thousands, like the propagandistbelonging to a small group that has not yet given leadership to themasses; in these circumstances one must count in millions and tens ofmillions.
 
any army which does not train to use all the weapons, allthe means and methods of warfare that the enemy possesses, or maypossess, is behaving in an unwise or even criminal manner. This appliesto politics even more than it does to the art of war.
 
It is not difficult to be a revolutionary when revolutionhas already broken out and is in spate, when all people are joining therevolution just because they are carried away, because it is the vogue,and sometimes even from careerist motives. It is far moredifficult—and far more precious—to be arevolutionary when the conditions for direct, open, really mass andreally revolutionary struggle do not yet exist.
 
One of the biggest and most dangerous mistakes made byCommunists is the idea that a revolution can be made by revolutionariesalone. On the contrary, to be successful, all serious revolutionarywork requires that the idea that revolutionaries are capable of playingthe part only of the vanguard of the truly virile and advanced classmust be understood and translated into action.
 
Without an alliance with non-Communists in the most diversespheres of activity there can be no question of any successfulcommunist construction.
 
The most important thing is to know how to awaken in thestill undeveloped masses an intelligent attitude towards religiousquestions and an intelligent criticism of religions.
 
No natural science can hold its own in the struggle againstthe onslaught of bourgeois ideas and the restoration of the bourgeoisworld outlook unless it stands on solid philosophical ground. In orderto hold his own in this struggle and carry it to a victorious finish,the natural scientist must be a modern materialist, a consciousadherent of the materialism represented by Marx, i.e., he must be adialectical materialist.
 
Modern natural scientists (if they know how to seek, and ifwe learn to help them) will find in the Hegelian dialectics,materialistically interpreted, a series of answers to the philosophicalproblems which are being raised by the revolution in natural science.
 
the prime factors in the question of stability are suchmembers of the C.C. as Stalin and Trotsky. I think relations betweenthem make up the greater part of the danger of a split.
 
Comrade Stalin, having become Secretary-General, hasunlimited authority concentrated in his hands, and I am not surewhether he will always be capable of using that authority withsufficient caution.
 
Stalin is too rude and this defect, although quite tolerablein our midst and in dealing among us Communists, becomes intolerable ina Secretary-General. That is why I suggest that the comrades thinkabout a way of removing Stalin from that post and appointing anotherman in his stead.
 
Our schoolteacher should be raised to a standard he hasnever achieved, and cannot achieve, in bourgeois society. This is atruism and requires no proof. 
 
If a definite level of culture is required for the buildingof socialism (although nobody can say just what that definite‘level of culture’ is, for it differs in everyWestern European country), why cannot we began by first achieving theprerequisites for that definite level of culture in a revolutionaryway, and then, with the aid of the workers’ andpeasants’ government and Soviet system, proceed to overtakethe other nations? 
 
Napoleon, I think, wrote: “Ons’engage et puis ... on voit.” renderedfreely this means: “First engage in a serious battle and thensee what happens. ” Well, we did first engage in a seriousbattle in October 1917. And now there can be no doubt that in the mainwe have been victorious. 
 
We must follow the rule: Better fewer, but better. We mustfollow the rule: Better get good human material in two or even threeyears than work in haste without hope of getting any at all.
 
While the bourgeois state methodically concentrates all itsefforts on doping the urban workers, adapting all the literaturepublished at state expense and at the expense of the tsarist andbourgeois parties for this purpose, we can and must utilise ourpolitical power to make the urban worker an effective vehicle ofcommunist ideas among the rural proletariat. 
 
Without revolutionary theory there can be no revolutionarymovement.
 
So long as the state exists there is no freedom. When thereis freedom, there will be no state.
 
Democracy means equality. The great significance of theproletariat's struggle for equality and of equality as a slogan will beclear if we correctly interpret it as meaning the abolition of classes.But democracy means only formal equality. And as soon as equality isachieved for all members of society in relation to ownership of themeans of production, that is, equality of labor and wages, humanitywill inevitably be confronted with the question of advancing father,from formal equality to actual equality, i.e., to the operation of therule “from each according to his ability, to each accordingto his needs”.
 
We say: our aim is to achieve a socialist system of society,which, by eliminating the division of mankind into classes, byeliminating all exploitation of man by man and nation by nation, willinevitably eliminate the very possibility of war.
 
The real education of the masses can never be separated fromtheir independent political, and especially revolutionary, struggle.Only struggle educates the exploited class. Only struggle discloses toit the magnitude of its own power, widens its horizon, enhances itsabilities, clarifies its mind, forges its will.
 
Capital is an international force. To vanquish it, aninternational workers' alliance, an international workers' brotherhood,is needed.We are opposed to national enmity and discord, to nationalexclusiveness. We are internationalists.
 
[...] I must say that the tasks of the youth in general, andof the Young Communist Leagues and all other organisations inparticular, might be summed up in a single word: learn.
 

